<f:view xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
        xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
        xmlns:fn="http://java.sun.com/jsp/jstl/functions"
        xmlns:g="http://code.google.com/p/ada-ado/generator"
        xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
        file="Makefile.in"><![CDATA[
NAME=#{projectName}
#{''}

# You may edit this makefile as long as you keep these original 
# target names defined.
MODE=debug
GNATMAKE=@GNATMAKE@
GNATCLEAN=gnatclean
SVN=svn
INSTALL=@INSTALL@
DYNAMO=dynamo
LN_S=@LN_S@
MKDIR=mkdir
CP=cp
LN=ln -s
#{''}

GPRPATH:=\${NAME}.gpr
#{''}

#{''}

#{''}
distdir=#{projectName}-@#{fn:toUpperCase(projectName)}_VERSION@

#{''}
DIST_FILE=#{projectName}-@#{fn:toUpperCase(projectName)}_VERSION@.tar.gz
#{''}

HAVE_MYSQL=@ADO_DB_MYSQL@
HAVE_SQLITE=@ADO_DB_SQLITE@
#{''}

srcdir = .
bindir = @bindir@
sbindir = @sbindir@
top_srcdir = @top_srcdir@
VPATH = @srcdir@
prefix = @prefix@
exec_prefix = @exec_prefix@
top_builddir = .

dynamodir=\${prefix}/share/dynamo
includedir=\${prefix}/share/ada/adainclude
projectdir=\${prefix}/share/ada/adainclude
bindir=\${prefix}/bin
libdir=\${prefix}/lib
alidir=\${libdir}/ada/adalib/
#{''}

MAKE_ARGS=-XMODE=\${MODE}
#{''}

all:     build
#{''}

# Build executables for all mains defined by the project.
build:
	test ! -f $(GPRPATH) || $(GNATMAKE) -m -p -P "$(GPRPATH)" $(MAKE_ARGS)
#{''}

# Not intended for manual invocation.
# Invoked if automatic builds are enabled.
# Analyzes only on those sources that have changed.
# Does not build executables.
autobuild:
	$(GNATMAKE) -gnatc -c -k  -P "$(GPRPATH)"
#{''}

# Clean the root project of all build products.
clean:
	-$(GNATCLEAN) -q -P "$(GPRPATH)"
	-rm -rf $(distdir)
#{''}

# Clean root project and all imported projects too.
clean_tree:
	$(GNATCLEAN) -P "$(GPRPATH)" -r
#{''}

# Check *all* sources for errors, even those not changed.
# Does not build executables.
analyze:
	$(GNATMAKE) -f  -gnatc -c -k  -P "$(GPRPATH)"
#{''}

# Clean, then build executables for all mains defined by the project.
rebuild: clean build
#{''}

# Rebuild the generated model files
generate:
	$(DYNAMO) generate db
#{''}

# Files to package in source distribution
DISTFILES=README LICENSE.txt NOTICE.txt NEWS CHANGES ChangeLog config.guess configure config.sub \
configure.in Makefile.in install-sh \
\${NAME}.gpr.in config.gpr dynamo.xml \
src db \${NAME}.properties \
distrib bin obj
#{''}

dist-prepare:
	-rm -rf $(distdir)
	mkdir $(distdir)
	-chmod 777 $(distdir)
	here=`cd $(top_builddir) && pwd`; \
	top_distdir=`cd $(distdir) && pwd`; \
	distdir=`cd $(distdir) && pwd`; \
	for file in $(DISTFILES); do \
	  d=$(srcdir); \
	  if test -d $$d/$$file; then \
	    cp -pr $$d/$$file $(distdir)/$$file; \
	  else \
	    test -f $(distdir)/$$file \
	    || ln $$d/$$file $(distdir)/$$file 2> /dev/null \
	    || cp -p $$d/$$file $(distdir)/$$file || :; \
	  fi; \
	done
	mkdir -p $(distdir)/bin
	mkdir -p $(distdir)/obj
	mkdir -p $(distdir)/lib
#{''}

dist:   dist-prepare
	tar --exclude=.svn --exclude="*~" --exclude="*.o" --exclude="*.ali" \
	    --exclude="*.log" --exclude="*.a" --exclude=".project" \
	    --exclude=".cproject" \
	    --exclude=".gb_project" \
	    -cvzf $(DIST_FILE) $(distdir)
#{''}

install:  uninstall
	$(INSTALL) bin/\${NAME} $(prefix)/bin/\${NAME}
#{''}

uninstall:
	rm -f \${bindir}/\${NAME}

]]>
</f:view>
